## Strings

- [What is a string?](#what-is-a-string)
- [Why do we need strings?](#why-do-we-need-strings)
- [Declaring a string](#declaring-a-string)
- [Accessing characters of a string](#accessing-characters-of-a-string)
- [C-string vs. C++ string](#c-string-vs-c-string)
- [String operations](#string-operations)
  - [Concatenation](#concatenation)
  - [Length](#length)
  - [Substring](#substring)
  - [Searching](#searching)
  - [Insertion](#insertion)
  - [Deletion](#deletion)
  - [Comparison](#comparison)
    - [Lexicographical comparison](#lexicographical-comparison)
  - [Conversion](#conversion)
  - [Iterating over a string](#iterating-over-a-string)
  - [Copying](#copying)
  - [Sorting](#sorting)
  - [Reversing](#reversing)

## What is a string?

A string is a sequence of characters stored in contiguous memory locations. Each character in a string is accessed by an index, which is an integer value that represents the position of the character in the string.

Strings are used to store text data in a program. They are useful when you need to work with sequences of characters that are related to each other.

## Why do we need strings?

Strings are used to store text data in a program. They are useful when you need to work with sequences of characters that are related to each other.

For example, you can use a string to store the name of a person, the address of a location, or the content of a document.

## Declaring a string

To declare a string in C++, you need to include the `<string>` header file and use the `std::string` class. The syntax for declaring a string is as follows:

```cpp
string name;
name = "Some Name";
```

## Accessing characters of a string

You can access characters of a string using the index of the character. The index of a string starts from 0, so the first character of a string has an index of 0, the second character has an index of 1, and so on.

Here is an example of accessing characters of a string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

cout << name[0] << endl; // H
```

## C-string vs. C++ string

In C++, there are two types of strings: C-strings and C++ strings.

C-strings are arrays of characters terminated by a null character (`'\0'`). They are used in C-style string operations and are not recommended for use in C++ programs.

C++ strings are objects of the `std::string` class provided by the C++ Standard Library. They are safer and more convenient to use than C-strings, as they provide a wide range of string operations and handle memory management automatically.

### Declaring a C-string

To declare a C-string in C++, you need to declare an array of characters and initialize it with a null-terminated string literal. The syntax for declaring a C-string is as follows:

```cpp

char name[] = "Some Name";
const char* name = "Some Name";
char name[10] = "Some Name"; // The size you give should be greater than the length of the string

```

### NULL Terminated String

A NULL-terminated string is a sequence of characters terminated by a null character (`'\0'`). The null character is used to mark the end of the string and is not displayed when the string is printed.

For example, the string `"Hello"` is represented as `'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0'` in memory.

## String operations

C++ strings provide a wide range of operations that can be performed on strings. Some of the common string operations include concatenation, length, substring, searching, insertion, deletion, comparison, conversion, iterating, copying, sorting, and reversing.

### Concatenation

Concatenation is the process of combining two or more strings to create a new string. You can concatenate strings using the `+` operator or the `append()` method.

Here is an example of concatenating strings:

```cpp

string first = "Hello";
string second = "World";

string result = first + " " + second;
string result2 = first;

result2.append(" ");
result2.append(second);


cout << result << endl; // Hello World
```

### Length

The length of a string is the number of characters in the string. You can find the length of a string using the `length()` method or the `size()` method.

Here is an example of finding the length of a string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

cout << name.length() << endl; // 9
cout << name.size() << endl; // 9
```

### Substring

A substring is a sequence of characters within a string. You can extract a substring from a string using the `substr()` method.

Here is an example of extracting a substring from a string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

string sub = name.substr(5, 4);

cout << sub << endl; // Name
```

### Searching

You can search for a character or a substring within a string using the `find()` method.

Here is an example of searching for a character or a substring within a string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

int pos = name.find("Name");

if(pos != string::npos) {
    cout << "Found at position: " << pos << endl;
} else {
    cout << "Not found" << endl;
}
```

### Insertion

Insertion is the process of adding characters or a substring to a string at a specific position. You can insert characters or a substring into a string using the `insert()` method.

Here is an example of inserting characters or a substring into a string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

name.insert(5, " New");

cout << name << endl; // Some New Name
```

### Deletion

Deletion is the process of removing characters or a substring from a string. You can delete characters or a substring from a string using the `erase()` method.

Here is an example of deleting characters or a substring from a string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

name.erase(5, 4);

cout << name << endl; // Some
```

### Comparison

You can compare two strings to determine if they are equal, less than, or greater than each other. You can use the `==`, `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, and `>=` operators to compare strings.

Here is an example of comparing two strings:

```cpp

string first = "Hello";

string second = "World";


if (first == second) {
    cout << "Strings are equal" << endl;
} else if (first < second) {
    cout << "First string is less than second string" << endl;
} else {
    cout << "First string is greater than second string" << endl;
}
```

### Lexicographical comparison

Lexicographical comparison is the process of comparing two strings based on their alphabetical order. You can use the `compare()` method to perform a lexicographical comparison of two strings.

## Conversion

You can convert a string to a C-string or a C-string to a string using the `c_str()` method.

Here is an example of converting a string to a C-string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

const char* cstr = name.c_str();

cout << cstr << endl; // Some Name
```

## Iterating over a string

You can iterate over a string using a loop and access each character of the string using the index of the character.

Here is an example of iterating over a string:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

for (int i = 0; i < name.length(); i++) {
    cout << name[i] << endl;
}
```

### For each loop (String and Arrays)

You can also use a for-each loop to iterate over the characters of a string.

Here is an example of iterating over a string using a for-each loop:

```cpp

string name = "Some Name";

for (char c : name) {
    cout << c << endl;
}

int numbers[5] = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50};

for (int n : numbers) {
    cout << n << endl;
}


```

### Copying

You can copy a string to another string using the `=` operator or the `assign()` method.

Here is an example of copying a string to another string:

```cpp

string first = "Hello";

string second = first;

string third;
third.assign(first);

cout << second << endl; // Hello
```

### Sorting

You can sort the characters of a string in lexicographical order using the `sort()` method.

Here is an example of sorting the characters of a string:

```cpp

#include <algorithm>


string name = "Some Name";

sort(name.begin(), name.end());

cout << name << endl; // eMmNmoSa
```

### Reversing

You can reverse the characters of a string using the `reverse()` method.

Here is an example of reversing the characters of a string:

```cpp

#include <algorithm>


string name = "Some Name";

reverse(name.begin(), name.end());

cout << name << endl;
```
