# Functions

- [What is a function?](#what-is-a-function)
- [Why do we need functions?](#why-do-we-need-functions)
- [Using functions](#using-functions)
  - [Declaring a function](#declaring-a-function)
  - [Defining a function](#defining-a-function)
  - [Calling a function](#calling-a-function)
  - [Function parameters](#function-parameters)
  - [Function return type](#function-return-type)
  - [Function overloading](#function-overloading)
  - [Function prototypes](#function-prototypes)
  - [Function scope](#function-scope)
  - [Function recursion](#function-recursion)
- [Passing arguments to functions](#passing-arguments-to-functions)

  - [Default arguments](#default-arguments)
  - [Pass by value](#pass-by-value)
  - [Pass by reference](#pass-by-reference)
  - [Pass Array to Function](#pass-array-to-function)

- [Basic C++ Built-in Functions](#basic-c-built-in-functions)
  - [Math Functions](#math-functions)
  - [String Functions](#string-functions)
  - [Character Functions](#character-functions)
  - [Array Functions](#array-functions)
  - [Random Functions](#random-functions)
  - [Type Conversion Functions](#type-conversion-functions)
  - [Input/Output Functions](#inputoutput-functions)

## What is a function?

A function is a block of code that performs a specific task. It is a self-contained unit of code that can be called by other parts of a program to perform the task it was designed for.

Functions are used to organize code into logical units, making it easier to read, write, and maintain. They help in reducing code duplication and improving code reusability.

## Why do we need functions?

Functions are used to organize code into logical units, making it easier to read, write, and maintain. They help in reducing code duplication and improving code reusability.

For example, you can use a function to calculate the sum of two numbers, find the maximum of three numbers, or print a message to the console.

## Using functions

### Declaring a function

To declare a function in C++, you need to specify the return type of the function, the name of the function, and the parameters it takes (if any). The syntax for declaring a function is as follows:

```cpp

return_type function_name(parameter1_type parameter1, parameter2_type parameter2, ...);

```

Here is an example of declaring a function that takes two integers as parameters and returns an integer:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b);

```

In the above code, we have declared a function named `add` that takes two integers as parameters and returns an integer.

### Defining a function

To define a function in C++, you need to provide the implementation of the function. The implementation of a function consists of the code that performs the task the function was designed for. The syntax for defining a function is as follows:

```cpp

return_type function_name(parameter1_type parameter1, parameter2_type parameter2, ...)
{
    // Function body
    // Code that performs the task
}

```

#### Defining a function VS Declaring a function

A function declaration tells the compiler about a function's name, return type, and parameters. A function definition provides the actual body of the function.

Deleration:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b);

```

Definition:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}

```

In the above code, we have defined a function named `add` that takes two integers as parameters and returns the sum of the two integers.

### Calling a function

To call a function in C++, you need to use the function name followed by parentheses `()` and provide the arguments the function takes (if any). The syntax for calling a function is as follows:

```cpp

function_name(argument1, argument2, ...);

```

Here is an example of calling the `add` function we defined earlier:

```cpp

int result = add(10, 20);

```

In the above code, we have called the `add` function with the arguments `10` and `20` and stored the result in a variable named `result`.

### Function parameters

Function parameters are the variables that are passed to a function when it is called. They are used to provide input to the function so that it can perform its task. Function parameters are specified in the function declaration and definition inside the parentheses `()`.

Here is an example of a function that takes two integers as parameters:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}

```

In the above code, the `add` function takes two integers `a` and `b` as parameters.

### Function return type

The return type of a function specifies the type of value the function returns after performing its task. It is specified in the function declaration and definition before the function name.

Here is an example of a function that returns an integer:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}

```

In the above code, the `add` function returns an integer value.

#### WHAT IF A FUNCTION DOESN'T RETURN ANYTHING?

If a function does not return any value, its return type is specified as `void`. A function with a return type of `void` does not return any value after performing its task.

Here is an example of a function that does not return any value:

```cpp

void greet()
{
    cout << "Hello, World!" << endl;
}

```

In the above code, the `greet` function does not return any value.

### Function overloading

Function overloading is a feature in C++ that allows you to define multiple functions with the same name but different parameters. When you call an overloaded function, the compiler determines which version of the function to call based on the number and types of arguments you provide.

Here is an example of overloading the `add` function to work with different types of arguments:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}

double add(double a, double b)
{
    return a + b;
}

```

In the above code, we have defined two versions of the `add` function that work with integers and doubles, respectively.

Another Example Where we take 3 arguments:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b, int c)
{
    return a + b + c;
}

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}

// Calling

int result1 = add(10, 20, 30); // 60

int result2 = add(10, 20); // 30



```

### Function prototypes

A function prototype is a declaration of a function that tells the compiler about the function's name, return type, and parameters. It is used to inform the compiler about the existence of a function before it is called in the program.

Here is an example of a function prototype:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b);

int main()
{
    int result = add(10, 20);
    cout << result << endl;
    return 0;
}

int add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}

```

In the above code, we have declared a function prototype for the `add` function before the `main` function. This allows us to call the `add` function in the `main` function before defining the `add` function.

### Function scope

The scope of a function refers to the visibility and accessibility of the function within a program. Functions in C++ have a global scope by default, which means they can be accessed from anywhere in the program.

Here is an example of a function with global scope:

```cpp

int number = 10;

int add(int a, int b)
{
    int X = 10;
    cout << number << endl; // 10
    return a + b;
}


int main()
{
    cout << number << endl; // 10
    cout << X << endl; // Error
    return 0;
}

```

### Function recursion

Recursion is a programming technique where a function calls itself to solve a problem. It is a powerful tool for solving complex problems that can be broken down into smaller subproblems.

Here is an example of a recursive function that calculates the factorial of a number:

```cpp

int factorial(int n)
{
    if(n == 0)
    {
        return 1;
    }
    else
    {
        return n * factorial(n - 1);
    }
}

int main()
{
    int result = factorial(5);
    cout << result << endl; // 120
    return 0;
}

```

## Passing arguments to functions

### Default arguments

Default arguments are the values that are used by a function when no argument is provided for a parameter. They are specified in the function declaration and definition by assigning a default value to the parameter.

Here is an example of a function with default arguments:

```cpp


int add(int a, int b = 10)
{
    return a + b;
}

int main()
{
    int result1 = add(10, 20); // 30
    int result2 = add(10); // 20
    return 0;
}

```

In the above code, the `add` function has a default argument of `10` for the second parameter `b`. If no argument is provided for `b`, the default value of `10` is used.

### Pass by value

Pass by value is a method of passing arguments to a function where the value of the argument is copied to the function's parameter. Any changes made to the parameter inside the function do not affect the original argument.

Here is an example of passing arguments by value:

```cpp

int add(int a, int b)
{
    a = a + 10;
    return a + b;
}


int main()
{
    int x = 10;
    int y = 20;
    int result = add(x, y);
    cout << x << endl; // 10
    cout << y << endl; // 20
    cout << result << endl; // 40
    return 0;
}

```

In the above code, the `add` function takes two arguments `a` and `b` by value. Any changes made to `a` inside the function do not affect the original argument `x`.

### Pass by reference

Pass by reference is a method of passing arguments to a function where the memory address of the argument is passed to the function's parameter. Any changes made to the parameter inside the function affect the original argument.

Here is an example of passing arguments by reference:

```cpp

void increment(int& a)
{
    a = a + 10;
}

int main()
{
    int x = 10;
    increment(x);
    cout << x << endl; // 20
    return 0;
}

```

In the above code, the `increment` function takes an argument `a` by reference. Any changes made to `a` inside the function affect the original argument `x`.

### Pass Array to Function

You can pass an array to a function in C++ by specifying the array name as a parameter in the function declaration and definition. When you pass an array to a function, you need to specify the size of the array in the parameter list.

Here is an example of passing an array to a function:

```cpp

void printArray(int arr[], int size)
{
    for (int i = 0; i < size; i++)
    {
        cout << arr[i] << " ";
    }
    cout << endl;
}

int main()
{
    int numbers[] = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50};
    printArray(numbers, 5);
    return 0;
}

```

In the above code, we have defined a function named `printArray` that takes an integer array `arr` and its size `size` as parameters. We have then passed an array named `numbers` to the `printArray` function along with its size `5`.

## Basic C++ Built-in Functions

### Math Functions

- `abs(x)`: Returns the absolute value of `x`.
- `pow(x, y)`: Returns `x` raised to the power of `y`.
- `sqrt(x)`: Returns the square root of `x`.
- `cbrt(x)`: Returns the cube root of `x`.
- `ceil(x)`: Returns the smallest integer greater than or equal to `x`.
- `floor(x)`: Returns the largest integer less than or equal to `x`.

### String Functions

These work on c-style strings.

- `strlen(str)`: Returns the length of the string `str`.
- `strcpy(dest, src)`: Copies the string `src` to `dest`.
- `strcat(dest, src)`: Concatenates the string `src` to `dest`.
- `strcmp(str1, str2)`: Compares two strings `str1` and `str2`.

### Character Functions

- `isalpha(c)`: Returns true if `c` is an alphabet.
- `isdigit(c)`: Returns true if `c` is a digit.
- `isalnum(c)`: Returns true if `c` is an alphanumeric character.
- `isupper(c)`: Returns true if `c` is an uppercase letter.
- `islower(c)`: Returns true if `c` is a lowercase letter.

### Array Functions

- `sort(arr, arr + n)`: Sorts the array `arr` of size `n`.
- `reverse(arr, arr + n)`: Reverses the array `arr` of size `n`.
- `max_element(arr, arr + n)`: Returns an iterator to the maximum element in the array `arr`.
- `min_element(arr, arr + n)`: Returns an iterator to the minimum element in the array `arr`.
- `accumulate(arr, arr + n, initial)`: Returns the sum of the elements in the array `arr` starting from `initial`.
- `count(arr, arr + n, x)`: Returns the number of occurrences of `x` in the array `arr`.

### Random Functions

- `rand()`: Generates a random number.
- `srand(seed)`: Seeds the random number generator.

What does it mean to seed the random number generator?

The random number generator in C++ is a pseudo-random number generator that generates a sequence of random numbers based on a seed value. The seed value is used to initialize the random number generator and determine the sequence of random numbers it generates.

How To use srand() and rand() functions:

```cpp

#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    // Seed the random number generator
    // Generate a random number between 1 and 100
    int random_number = rand() % 100 + 1;

    cout << "Random number: " << random_number << endl;

    return 0;
}


```

Using srand(seed)

```cpp

#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
    // Seed the random number generator with a specific value
    srand(42);

    // Generate a random number between 1 and 100
    int random_number = rand() % 100 + 1;

    cout << "Random number: " << random_number << endl;

    return 0;
}

```

### Type Conversion Functions

- `atoi(str)`: Converts a string `str` to an integer.
- `atof(str)`: Converts a string `str` to a floating-point number.
- `itoa(num, str, base)`: Converts an integer `num` to a string `str` with the specified `base`.
- `to_string(num)`: Converts an integer `num` to a string.
- `int(num)`: Converts a number `num` to an integer, num must be any number type.
- `double(num)`: Converts a number `num` to a double, num must be any number type.
- `char(num)`: Converts a number `num` to a char, num must be any number type.
