# Time Complexity

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Big O Notation](#big-o-notation)

  - [O(1) Constant Time](#o1-constant-time)
  - [O(n) Linear Time](#on-linear-time)
  - [O(n^2) Quadratic Time](#on2-quadratic-time)
  - [O(log n) Logarithmic Time](#olog-n-logarithmic-time)
  - [O(n log n) Linearithmic Time](#on-log-n-linearithmic-time)
  - [O(2^n) Exponential Time](#o2n-exponential-time)
  - [O(n!) Factorial Time](#on-factorial-time)

- [Space Complexity](#space-complexity)
- [Number of Operations](#number-of-operations)
- [Common Time Limit Exceeded Verdicts](#common-time-limit-exceeded-verdicts)
- [Common Memory Limit Exceeded Verdicts](#common-memory-limit-exceeded-verdicts)
- [Practice On Analyzing Time Complexity](#practice-on-analysing-time-complexity)

## Introduction

Time complexity is a concept in computer science that deals with the amount of time that a particular algorithm takes to complete. It is a measure of the amount of time taken by an algorithm to run as a function of the length of the input. Time complexity is commonly estimated by counting the number of elementary operations performed by the algorithm, where an elementary operation takes a fixed amount of time to perform.

## Big O Notation

Big O notation is a mathematical notation that describes the limiting behavior of a function when the argument tends towards a particular value or infinity. It is used to describe the upper bound of the time complexity of an algorithm. The Big O notation is used to describe the worst-case time complexity of an algorithm.

### O(1) Constant Time

An algorithm is said to have a constant time complexity if the time taken to complete the algorithm does not depend on the size of the input. This means that the time taken to complete the algorithm is constant, regardless of the size of the input.

Example: Accessing an element in an array by index.

```cpp
int arr[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
int x = arr[2];
```

### O(n) Linear Time

An algorithm is said to have a linear time complexity if the time taken to complete the algorithm is directly proportional to the size of the input. This means that the time taken to complete the algorithm increases linearly with the size of the input.

Example: Finding the maximum element in an array.

```cpp

int n;
cin >> n;

int arr[n];
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    cin >> arr[i];
}

int max = arr[0];

for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
    if (arr[i] > max) {
        max = arr[i];
    }
}
```

### O(n^2) Quadratic Time

An algorithm is said to have a quadratic time complexity if the time taken to complete the algorithm is proportional to the square of the size of the input. This means that the time taken to complete the algorithm increases quadratically with the size of the input.

Example: Bubble sort algorithm.

```cpp

int n;

cin >> n;

int arr[n];

for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    cin >> arr[i];
}

for (int i = 0; i < n - 1; i++) {
    for (int j = 0; j < n - i - 1; j++) {
        if (arr[j] > arr[j + 1]) {
            swap(arr[j], arr[j + 1]);
        }
    }
}
```

Also, Consider A Matrix, where it has n rows, and m cloumns. The time complexity of the following code is O(n\*m).

```cpp

int n, m;

cin >> n >> m;

int A[n][m];

for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    for (int j = 0; j < m; j++) {
        cin >> A[i][j];
    }
}
```

### O(log n) Logarithmic Time

An algorithm is said to have a logarithmic time complexity if the time taken to complete the algorithm is proportional to the logarithm of the size of the input. This means that the time taken to complete the algorithm increases logarithmically with the size of the input.

Example: Printing the powers of 2 up to a given number.

```cpp

int n;

cin >> n;

for (int i = 1; i <= n; i *= 2) {
    cout << i << " ";
}
```

### O(n log n) Linearithmic Time

An algorithm is said to have a linearithmic time complexity if the time taken to complete the algorithm is proportional to the product of the size of the input and the logarithm of the size of the input. This means that the time taken to complete the algorithm increases linearithmically with the size of the input.
