# STLs

- [What is an STL?](#what-is-an-stl)
- [Basic STLs?](#what-are-the-basic-stls)
  - [Vector](#vector)
  - [String](#string)
  - [Pair](#pair)
  - [Stack](#stack)
  - [Queue](#queue)
  - [Map](#map)
  - [Set](#set)

## What is an STL?

STL stands for Standard Template Library. It is a collection of C++ template classes, functions, and algorithms that are used to implement data structures and algorithms. STL is a part of the C++ Standard Library.

## What are the basic STLs?

### Vector

- A vector is a sequence container that encapsulates dynamic size arrays.

```cpp

#include <iostream>

#include <vector>

using namespace std;

int main() {

    vector<int> v;

    v.push_back(1);

    v.push_back(2);

    v.push_back(3);

    for (int i = 0; i < v.size(); i++) {

        cout << v[i] << " ";

    }

    return 0;

}

```

Vector Methods:

- `push_back()`: Adds an element to the end of the vector. O(1)
- `pop_back()`: Removes the last element from the vector. O(1)
- `size()`: Returns the number of elements in the vector. O(1)
- `empty()`: Returns a boolean value indicating whether the vector is empty or not. O(1)
- `clear()`: Removes all elements from the vector. O(n)
- `begin()`: Returns an iterator pointing to the first element of the vector. O(1)
- `end()`: Returns an iterator pointing to the last element of the vector. O(1)
- `insert()`: Inserts elements at a specified position in the vector. O(n)
- `erase()`: Removes elements from a specified position or range in the vector. O(n)

### String

- A string is a sequence of characters.

```cpp

#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

int main() {

    string s = "Hello, World!";

    cout << s << endl;

    return 0;

}

```

String Methods:

- `size()`: Returns the number of characters in the string. O(1)
- `length()`: Returns the number of characters in the string. O(1)
- `empty()`: Returns a boolean value indicating whether the string is empty or not. O(1)
- `clear()`: Removes all characters from the string. O(n)
- `substr()`: Returns a substring of the string. O(n)
- `find()`: Searches for a substring in the string. O(n)
- `replace()`: Replaces a substring in the string with another substring. O(n)

### Pair

- A pair is a container that stores two values.

```cpp

#include <iostream>

#include <utility>

using namespace std;

int main() {

    pair<int, int> p = make_pair(1, 2);

    cout << p.first << " " << p.second << endl;

    return 0;

}

```

### Stack

- A stack is a container that stores elements in a last-in, first-out (LIFO) order.

```cpp

#include <iostream>

#include <stack>

using namespace std;

int main() {

    stack<int> s;

    s.push(1);

    s.push(2);

    s.push(3);

    while (!s.empty()) {

        cout << s.top() << " ";

        s.pop();

    }

    return 0;

}

```

### Queue

- A queue is a container that stores elements in a first-in, first-out (FIFO) order.

```cpp

#include <iostream>

#include <queue>

using namespace std;

int main() {

    queue<int> q;

    q.push(1);

    q.push(2);

    q.push(3);

    while (!q.empty()) {

        cout << q.front() << " ";

        q.pop();

    }

    return 0;

}

```

Stack and Queue Methods:

- `push()`: Adds an element to the stack or queue. O(1)
- `pop()`: Removes the top element from the stack or the front element from the queue. O(1)
- `top()`: Returns the top element of the stack. (Only for stack) O(1)
- `front()`: Returns the front element of the queue. (Only for queue) O(1)
- `empty()`: Returns a boolean value indicating whether the stack or queue is empty or not. O(1)
- `size()`: Returns the number of elements in the stack or queue. O(1)

### Map

- A map is an associative container that stores key-value pairs.

The cost of accessing an element in a map is O(log n).

```cpp

#include <iostream>

#include <map>

using namespace std;

int main() {

    map<string, int> m;

    m["a"] = 1;

    m["b"] = 2;

    m["c"] = 3;

    for (auto it = m.begin(); it != m.end(); it++) {

        cout << it->first << " " << it->second << "\n";

    }

    return 0;

}

```

Map Methods:

- `insert()`: Inserts a key-value pair into the map. O(log n)
- `erase()`: Removes a key-value pair from the map. O(log n)
- `find()`: Searches for a key in the map. O(log n)
- `count()`: Returns the number of elements with a specific key in the map. O(log n)
- `size()`: Returns the number of elements in the map. O(1)
- `empty()`: Returns a boolean value indicating whether the map is empty or not. O(1)

### Set

- A set is an associative container that stores unique elements.

```cpp

#include <iostream>

#include <set>

using namespace std;

int main() {

    set<int> s;

    s.insert(1);

    s.insert(2);

    s.insert(3);

    for (auto it = s.begin(); it != s.end(); it++) {

        cout << *it << " ";

    }

    return 0;

}

```

Set Methods:

- `insert()`: Inserts an element into the set. O(log n)
- `erase()`: Removes an element from the set. O(log n)
- `find()`: Searches for an element in the set. O(log n)
- `count()`: Returns the number of elements with a specific value in the set. O(log n)
- `size()`: Returns the number of elements in the set. O(1)
- `empty()`: Returns a boolean value indicating whether the set is empty or not. O(1)

```


```
