# Pointers

- [What is a pointer?](#what-is-a-pointer)
- [Working with pointers](#working-with-pointers)
- [Stack and heap memory](#stack-and-heap-memory)
- [New and delete](#new-and-delete)
- [Pointer arithmetic](#pointer-arithmetic)
- [Arrays as pointers](#arrays-as-pointers)
- [Pointer to pointer](#pointer-to-pointer)
- [Multidimensional arrays](#multidimensional-arrays)
- [Const pointers](#const-pointers)
  - [Pointer to constant](#pointer-to-constant)
  - [Constant pointer](#constant-pointer)
- [Dynamic Array With Pointers](#dynamic-array-with-pointers)
- [Function Pointers](#function-pointers)

## What is a pointer?

A pointer is a variable that stores the memory address of another variable. Pointers are used to store the address of a variable instead of the variable itself. Pointers are used to access the memory location of a variable, which is useful for dynamic memory allocation and manipulation.

```cpp

int *p; // Pointer to an integer
int x;

p = &x; // Assign the address of x to p

```

In the above example, `p` is a pointer to an integer, and `x` is an integer. The `&` operator is used to get the address of a variable. The address of `x` is assigned to `p`.

## Working with pointers

Pointers are used to access the memory location of a variable. The `*` operator is used to dereference a pointer, which means to access the value stored at the memory location pointed to by the pointer.

```cpp

int x = 10;

int *p = &x;

cout << *p << endl; // Output: 10

```

```cpp

*p = 20;

cout << x << endl; // Output: 20

```

In the above example, `*p` is used to access the value stored at the memory location pointed to by `p`. The value of `x` is changed to 20 by dereferencing `p`.

## Stack and heap memory

Memory in a C++ program is divided into two parts: stack memory and heap memory. Stack memory is used for static memory allocation, while heap memory is used for dynamic memory allocation.

Stack memory is used to store local variables and function parameters. Stack memory is automatically allocated and deallocated by the compiler. Stack memory is fast but limited in size.

Heap memory is used to store dynamic memory allocated using `new` and `delete` operators. Heap memory is not automatically deallocated by the compiler, and it is the programmer's responsibility to deallocate the memory when it is no longer needed. Heap memory is slower than stack memory but has no size limit.

## New and delete

The `new` operator is used to allocate memory on the heap, and the `delete` operator is used to deallocate memory on the heap.

```cpp

int *p = new int(10);

cout << *p << endl; // Output: 10

delete p;

```

In the above example, the `new` operator is used to allocate memory for an integer on the heap, and the value 10 is assigned to the memory location. The `delete` operator is used to deallocate the memory when it is no longer needed.

## Pointer arithmetic

Pointer arithmetic is the arithmetic operations performed on pointers. Pointer arithmetic is used to navigate through memory locations and access elements of an array.

```cpp

int arr[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};

int *p = arr;

cout << *p << endl; // Output: 1

p++;

cout << *p << endl; // Output: 2


cout << *(p + 2) << endl; // Output: 4

cout << *(arr + 4) << endl; // Output: 4
```

In the above example, `p` is a pointer to an integer array `arr`. The `*` operator is used to access the value stored at the memory location pointed to by `p`. The `++` operator is used to increment the pointer to the next memory location.

## Arrays as pointers

Arrays are stored as pointers in memory. An array name is a constant pointer to the first element of the array. The array name can be used as a pointer to access the elements of the array.

```cpp

int *p = new int[5];

for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {

    p[i] = i + 1;

}

for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {

    cout << p[i] << " ";

}

delete[] p;

```

In the above example, `p` is a pointer to an integer array of size 5. The `new` operator is used to allocate memory for the array on the heap. The elements of the array are accessed using pointer arithmetic.

## Pointer to pointer

A pointer to a pointer is a pointer that stores the memory address of another pointer. A pointer to a pointer is used to store the address of a pointer variable.

```cpp

int x = 10;

int *p = &x;

int **q = &p;

cout << **q << endl; // Output: 10
cout << *q << endl; // Output: Address of p
cout << q << endl; // Output: Address of q
```

In the above example, `q` is a pointer to a pointer to an integer. The `**` operator is used to dereference the pointer to a pointer and access the value stored at the memory location pointed to by the pointer to a pointer.

## Multidimensional arrays

Multidimensional arrays are stored as pointers to pointers in memory. A two-dimensional array is stored as an array of pointers to arrays. The array name is a pointer to the first element of the array of pointers.

```cpp

int **p = new int*[3];

for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {

    p[i] = new int[3];

}

for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {

    for (int j = 0; j < 3; j++) {

        p[i][j] = i + j;

    }

}


for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {

    for (int j = 0; j < 3; j++) {

        cout << p[i][j] << " ";

    }

    cout << endl;

}

for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {

    delete[] p[i];

}

delete[] p;

```

In the above example, `p` is a pointer to a pointer to an integer. The `new` operator is used to allocate memory for a two-dimensional array on the heap. The elements of the array are accessed using pointer arithmetic.

## Const pointers

A const pointer is a pointer that cannot be changed to point to another memory location. A const pointer is used to store the address of a variable that cannot be changed.

```cpp

int x = 10;

int y = 20;

const int *p = &x;

p = &y; // Valid

*p = 30; // Invalid

```

In the above example, `p` is a const pointer to an integer. The `const` keyword is used to declare `p` as a const pointer. The value of `p` cannot be changed, but the memory location it points to can be changed.

### Pointer to constant

A pointer to a constant is a pointer that cannot be used to change the value stored at the memory location it points to. A pointer to a constant is used to store the address of a constant variable.

```cpp

int x = 10;

const int *p = &x;

*p = 20; // Invalid

```

In the above example, `p` is a pointer to a constant integer. The value of `x` cannot be changed using `p`.

### Constant pointer

A constant pointer is a pointer that cannot be changed to point to another memory location. A constant pointer is used to store the address of a variable that cannot be changed.

```cpp

int x = 10;

int y = 20;

int *const p = &x;

p = &y; // Invalid

*p = 30; // Valid

```

In the above example, `p` is a constant pointer to an integer. The `const` keyword is used to declare `p` as a constant pointer. The memory location pointed to by `p` cannot be changed, but the value stored at the memory location can be changed.

## Dynamic Array With Pointers

```cpp

class DynamicArray {

    int *arr;
    int index;
    int size;

public:

    DynamicArray(int s = 4) {

        size = s;
        index = 0;
        arr = new int[size];

    }

    int &operator[](int i) {

        if(i >= size) {
            throw "Array index out of bounds";
            return 0;
        }


        return arr[i];

    }
    void push_back(int val) {

        if(index == size) {

            int *temp = new int[size * 2];

            for(int i = 0; i < size; i++) {

                temp[i] = arr[i];

            }

            delete[] arr;

            arr = temp;

            size *= 2;

        }

        arr[index++] = val;

    }

    void pop_back() {

        if(index == 0) {

            throw "Array is empty";

        }

        index--;

    }

    int get_size() {

        return index;

    }



    ~DynamicArray() {

        delete[] arr;

    }



};
```

## Function Pointers

A function pointer is a pointer that stores the memory address of a function. Function pointers are used to call functions indirectly through the pointer.

```cpp

#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

void add(int a, int b) {

    cout << a + b << endl;

}

void subtract(int a, int b) {

    cout << a - b << endl;

}

int main() {

    void (*fp)(int, int);

    fp = add;

    fp(10, 5); // Output: 15

    fp = subtract;

    fp(10, 5); // Output: 5

    return 0;

}

```
